ADR: Listener Operator (#256)
stackabletech/documentation: modules/contributor/pages/adr/ADR024-out-of-cluster_access.adoc

Communication flow example using the HDFS Operator, assuming we're operating in an on-prem cluster:

* A HDFS cluster resource is created by the user, with a `public` listenerClassName for all roles.
* The HDFS Operator requests a PVC of the listener.stackable.tech type and an annotation to create a `public` listener. For Namenodes it requests sticky addresses, and for data nodes ephemeral addresses.
* The listener-operator provisions a NodePort Service for every volume request. This means a NodePort service per Pod. It reads the NodePort IP and port.
* The listener-operator provisions the volumes with files inside containing information about the pods outside address and port - The IP and port of the NodePort Service. Because of the PVC it knows which pod the volume will be mounted into, and can find out the NodePort that belongs to the pod.
* the HDFS operator already provisioned the pod with a script that read the files from the mounted volume into environment variables which are then read by HDFS. This part is product specific.

How are the problems in the <<_context_and_problem_statement,Problem Statement>> addressed?

> * **Unstable Addresses** - Using a CSI driver and mounting in storage automatically creates stickiness. Any new pods after a pod crashes will be created on the same node as the old pod - and thus also reuse the NodePort and the address it has should the volume be configured to be sticky to the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Unstable Addresses** - Using a CSI driver and mounting in storage lets us manage stickiness. Any new pods after a pod is deleted will be created on the same node as the old pod - and thus also reuse the NodePort and the address it has, should the volume be configured to be sticky to the node.
```

* **Replicas not addressable** - Since every replica in a StatefulSet will have its own Listener, they are also individually addressable.
* **Pods don't know their outside address** - The outside address of a pod gets passed into the pod through the mounted volume. The pod then knows its outside address.

=== How are external IPs retrieved by the listener operator?

> For LoadBalancers, the IPs are written back into the Service object, which are then taken from there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For LoadBalancers, the IPs are written back into the Service object (by the third-party load balancer controller), which are then taken from there.
```

=== Will it still be possible to use a LoadBalancer per role, if individual replica access is not required?

Yes. There is a 1:1 mapping of listener PVCs to deployed listeners. It is possible to pre-provision a listener PVCs for a role and then mount it into each role replica.

=== How the name came to be

The new operator handles resources related to bringing outside traffic into the cluster. Some words that come to mind were Ingress and Gateway, but they are already used by Kubernetes native objects. Initially LoadBalancer-operator was considered, but since it doesn't exclusively deploy LoadBalancer objects (also NodePorts), the name is not good.

Listener describes well its functionality: It is listening for outside traffic. Also, the name is not taken in Kubernetes yet.

== Decision Outcome

There is only one design, which is already in its implementation.

Pros:

* There is little routing overhead (compared to proxying or similar).

> * The listener-operator can be extended to support more ListenerClasses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The listener-operator can be extended to support more types of ListenerClasses.
```
